ClamAV installer on Docker engine

Developed by PS-Professional

     ____  ____        ____             __               _                   _ 
    |  _ \/ ___|      |  _ \ _ __ ___  / _| ___  ___ ___(_) ___  _ __   __ _| |
    | |_) \___ \ _____| |_) | '__/ _ \| |_ / _ \/ __/ __| |/ _ \| '_ \ / _` | |
    |  __/ ___) |_____|  __/| | | (_) |  _|  __/\__ \__ \ | (_) | | | | (_| | |
    |_|   |____/      |_|   |_|  \___/|_|  \___||___/___/_|\___/|_| |_|\__,_|_|


## What is ClamAV?

ClamAV is a command-line anti-virus which can scan your files by you command-line input or automatic scanning schedule. ClamAV can detect over 1 million viruses, worms and trojants, including Microsoft Office macro viruses, mobile malwares and other threats. For more information, visit [ClamAV documentation](https://clamav.net/document/introduction) on thier website.

## What will this project do?

This project will dockerize and setup ClamAV as a online anti-virus scanner and you can use this project to scan your localhost, webserer and other files online. As first step, all you need to do is run the run.sh script file. This script has six functions:
* init 

* start

* control

* restart

* stop

* exit

This script first check your host if Docker exists or not when you use `init` function. If you had installed Docker before, it will ask you for updating system or not and if you didn't installed docker before, it will start installing Docker on yuor host. After that Docker will start getting required files and make them ready for setting containers up. When init function done, you will back to your prompt. Then run the script agian and use `start` function to start ClamAV container. After service creation, you can scan your files online(We will describe it later). You can control ClamAV container using `control` option. If needed, you can restart containers using `restart` function and to shut it down, just use `stop` function. Finally, to exit from script just use `exit` function.

## How to scan my files?

Depending on your scan target, it may vary. But in this section, I will learn you how to scan your OS files. To perform this task, you should check wether `clamdscan` package is installed on your distribution or not. If not, you can simply installing it by using `sudo apt install clamdscan` command(Don't forget to run `sudo apt update` command first!). After that, there is a configuration file you need to change to scan your files online instead of local scan. The file is `/etc/clamav/clamd.conf` (If file is not present, run `clamd` command to create configuration file). In this file, you can see some directives ClamAV generated by default, but some should be modified. First, find `TCPAddr` and `TCPSocket` directives (If you didn't find them, don't worry. Add it manuallly!) and set `TCPAddr` to your `remote server address` and set `TCPSocket` to `3310`. To scan your files, use `clamdscan -v -m /path/to/files`. This should work but if something went wrong, first check yor remote server if its firewall is active and allow port 3310. To check this, on Ubuntu server, use `sudo ufw status` command. If firewall disabled, you need to change some settings on your local which described later in this section, but if firewall status is active, then check if this port is allowed or not. If this port is not in list or connections denied, use `sudo ufw allow 3310` to allow connection to this port on remote server. But if you face problems, you need to modify more ClamAV directives on `/etc/clamav/clamd.conf` file. There are some directives for ClamAV which use local Unix socket to scan your file locally. To avoid this happen, you need to comment `LocalSocket`, `FixStaleSocket`, `LocalSocketGroup` and `LocalSocketMode` directives. That should make it works.

## My experience on this project

I used ClamAV locally on my system and I decided to make it Server/Client base instead of locally use it. First, I noticed that to do this, you need to use `clamdscan` instead of `clamscan` command. Then I used ubuntu image and installed ClamAV packages and start configuring it as a server service. After some tries I did with ClamAV, I almost set it up and send some of my files to scan it and send me result. For dockerize it with `Dockerfile` and `docker-compse.yml` files, there was lots of problems. First, I couldn't refresh ClamAV database during its image creation. Another one is there was problem with `APT package manager` if you define needed proxy environment variables in `docker-compose.yml` files. For solving this problems, I decided to ignore getting ClamAV database files and defining required environment variables in `docker-compose.yml` file. Instead, I had created a startup script `script/clam-start (/usr/bin/clam-start in container)`before and what needed is modify that script so I can do both defining required envireonmnet variables and updating ClamAV database. Also I added an option which you can add bind you entire operating system to ClamAV container and defined a cronjob to scan it in 00:00 everyday. You can see its results by running `./run.sh` script, selecting `control` function and then `result` option.